1977-1983 Department Chair-Emile Attala
=======================================

Introduction
------------

Emile Attala had a vision where industry helped fund the Cal Poly Csc
Department. He, together with the faculty, worked hard to get equipment,
support, money or help in any way from the private sector to help fund
Csc programs. Hewlett-Packard, Chevron, Tandem, Apple, Xerox, Control
Data, TRW, and many others in the 1970-1980s helped with this objective.

Industrial Advisory Committee
-----------------------------

Emile formed an Industrial Advisory Committee consisting of Don Fowler,
a Vice President of Tandem; Charles Oldenberg, Manager of the Computer
Division of Chevron; Bruce Kehring, a Vice President of Service Bureau,
a division of CDC; an executive from TRW; and John Adelsbach, a Vice
President at HP in charge of software quality. This group met with Emile
and the Csc Department on a regular basis at Cal Poly, providing
guidance, computer equipment, and funds to support the Csc program. Many
of them became key players in the University Industrial Advisory Board
later established by Warren J. Baker.

Gary Kildall, who wrote CPM and created the company, Digital Research,
also served as an advisor to Emile. He would frequently fly his own
airplane to San Luis Obispo from Monterey and give talks to the Csc
students and faculty on topics such as compilers, operating systems and
programming in general. The CSL had computers running CPM developed by
Digital Research which had been donated to Cal Poly, as well as D.R.
Pascal and PL/I compilers.

[Editor’s Note: I well remember Dr. Gary Kildall’s visits to Cal Poly. He
gave presentations to the operating system classes on the file system
organization of CPM. He related to us how he designed the file system
and why he organized it that way. Very interesting and his code, I
remember, always had the Kildall style, which was short, well defined
modules – easy to read code.]

Computer Developments
---------------------

Interesting developments in the computer science evolution during
Professor Attala’s tenure as Department Head.[^11]

1.  In June 1977, John Lions, Department of Computer Science, The
    University of New South Wales, published two booklets, one
    containing a selection of Unix Source Code (version 6) for the PDP
    11/40 and a commentary on the Unix source code describing its
    operation line by line. The booklets, with permission from AT&T,
    were used as a text in many university operating system courses.

2.  The Motorola 68000 microprocessor exhibited a processing speed far
    greater than its contemporaries. This high performance processor
    found its place in powerful work stations intended for
    graphics-intensive programs common in engineering.

3.  In 1981, IBM introduced its PC, igniting a fast growth of the
    personal computer market. The first PC ran on 4.77 MHz intel 8088
    microprocessor and used Microsoft’s MS-DOS as its operating system.

4.  In 1982, Mitch Kapor developed Lotus 1-2-3, writing the software
    directly into the video system of the IBM PC. By bypassing DOS, it
    ran much faster than its competitors. Along with the immense
    popularity of the IBM’s computer, Lotus owed much of its success to
    its working combination of spreadsheet capabilities with graphics
    and data retrieval capabilities.

5.  Time magazine altered its annual tradition of naming a \`"Man of the
    Year,\`" choosing instead to name the computer its \`"Machine of the
    Year.\`" In introducing the theme, Time publisher John A. Meyers
    wrote, \`"Several human candidates might have represented 1982, but
    none symbolized the past year more richly, or will be viewed by
    history as more significant, than a machine: the computer.\`"

6.  The Cray XMP, first produced in this year, almost doubled the
    operating speed of competing machines with a parallel processing
    system that ran at 420 million floating-point operations per second,
    or megaflops. Arranging two Crays to work together on different
    parts of the same problem achieved the faster speed. Defense and
    scientific research institutes heavily used Crays.

7.  Apple Computer launched the Macintosh, the first successful
    mouse-driven computer with a graphic user interface, with a single
    $1.5 million commercial during the 1984 Super Bowl. Based on the
    Motorola 68000 microprocessor, the Macintosh included many of the
    Lisa’s features at a much more affordable price: $2,500.

![image](attala3.png)

Emile Attala accepting a donation from Bruce Kehring, Service Bureau
Corp., a Division of CDC, for the Department. Emile’s vision was to
involve the computer industry with education at the Cal Poly Csc
Department.

![image](emile1.png)

Emile Attala, King of Backgammon.

Formal Organization of CSL
--------------------------

As mentioned earlier Bernard Evans, under the direction of Dan Stubbs,
created the first Computer Science Laboratory for the microprocessor
courses.

In the school year of 1977-1978, Emile Attala formally established the
Computer Systems Laboratory with 375 square feet of space. One
technician, Ralph Nicovich, was allocated to it, with Jay Bayne as the
faculty director. By Spring quarter 1983, the space grew to 1800 square
feet by the addition of 14-238, and doubled later in the summer with the
addition of 14-235. By 1983, the CSL staff maintained the computer
literacy facilities, the faculty office systems and the department
computer systems as well as CSL software and hardware.

By May 1985, the CSL consisted of a half-time faculty Director and a
technical and administrative support of four. Approximately 1.5 of the 4
positions were for hardware maintenance and support, 2.0 for system
software support, and 0.5 for administrative support. There was 4,200
square feet of floor space, including a well equipped repair and
maintenance shop. CSL housed over $2 million worth of hardware and
software.

As of 1985 the CSL Advisory Committee consisted of Beug, Grimes, Keller,
Hsu, Stubbs, and Webre with Joseph Grimes as the Faculty Director. Staff
members Gilbert Keas, and Haley Landis handled software support with
Neal Pollack dealing with hardware and Alan Bell as software manager.
Daniel Stearns followed Joseph Grimes as Faculty Director of CSL.

Neal Pollack left Cal Poly in the Spring of 1987, and the department
hired Don Erickson for CSL manager. Don commented
that “every piece of equipment since he started has been replaced and
every network restructured.” He estimates that the equipment in CSL is
worth over $10,000,000.00. Ron Oliver, Ray Boche, and Chris Buckalew
have served as Faculty Directors over the years as well as various
Department chairmen. The acquisition of equipment in CSL as well as how
the lab evolved over 25 years makes an interesting story which is
developed in another chapter.

![image](chevron-baker.png)

Bill Lind, Manager of Chevron’s Computing Division, and Colleague
presenting Warren J. Baker, President of Cal Poly, $10,000 for Csc
Department’s Scholarship Fund.

Warren J. Baker - Cal Poly
--------------------------

The search for a new Cal Poly president concluded May 22, 1979, with the
announcement by the California State University Board of Trustees that
Cal Poly’s eighth president would be Warren J. Baker. A professor of
civil engineering from the University of Detroit, Baker held a Ph.D. in
geotechnical engineering from the University of New Mexico, as well as a
B.S. and M.S. degrees in civil engineering from the university of Notre
Dame. While in Detroit, he progressed rapidly through the administrative
ranks becoming the dean of the College of Engineering within seven
years, and then vice president for academic affairs.[^12]

Two decades later, when asked about his first impressions of Cal Poly,
Baker emphasized, “I had found that Cal Poly’s goals were similar to my
vision of higher education.” Arriving at the campus, I discovered, “an
institution in transition, founded with a focus on agriculture, but
expanding into a comprehensive polytechnic university. I also noted that
labs and other facilities needed significant improvement if ’learning by
doing’ was to flourish in the 1980’s and 1990’s.” Recalling the
excitement of those first days, Baker observed, “... seemed like a place
where a president could have considerable influence and not just be a
caretaker.”

In a 1998 essay on the “Future of the University,” Baker affirmed the
enduring place of learn by doing in a Cal Poly education.

> “Whenever appropriate in most disciplines, particularly those in
> polytechnic areas, we should reinforce classroom instructions with
> practical, “hands-on” learning in the laboratory, the studio, or out
> in the field. We should educate students to do what they are reading
> about, to apply the principles they learn, to act on their own ideas.”

Department Languages
--------------------

The main language for the core courses is an issue in any computer
science department. From 1969 to 1979 we used a variety of languages in
various classes, ranging from IBM 360 assembly, Fortran, COBOL, PL/I,
Algol, C, and even BASIC. The consensus seemed to be that everyone learn
assembly, Fortran or PL/I and then students choose another language
depending upon their interests. Since 1977, many faculty considered
neither Fortran or COBOL appropriate as a core-sequence language. Algol,
PL/1 and Pascal became the main candidates. We review history of the
1960’s-1970’s so you may see the environment and issues of that period.

### Algol

In a meeting held in Zurich in May, 1958, the ACM and the German Society
for Applied Mathematics met to specify a new language with the following
goals:

-   Close to the standard mathematical notation and self documenting.

-   Possible to use the language to describe algorithms for
    publications.

-   Programs written in the language must be translatable into machine
    code.

The language designed became Algol 58, a descendant of Fortran, with
several new features such as data types. The language's programs read
more like an algorithm than did Fortran's. A second meeting was held in
France, in 1960, where Algol was described in BNF form. In this time
period, excellent Algol compilers were available, but Algol 60 never
achieved significant use in the United States. Despite this, it remained a
formal means of communicating algorithms for over 20 years as seen in
the ACM Collected Algorithms.

![image](a-zane.png)

Zane Motteler with his computers.

### PL/I

Like Fortran, PL/I was developed as an IBM product. In this era, IBM
considered two views of computing.

1.  Scientific computing: Used floating point arithmetic, extensive use
    of arrays, minimal i/o, subroutine calls, complex algorithms, some
    assembly, and mainly used Fortran.

2.  Business computing: Packed decimal types, simple algorithms,
    elaborate file i/o, data processing, and used COBOL.

With the IBM 360 system of computers came the idea of a new language,
PL/I, that could be used both for scientific and business applications
and for good measure throw in systems programming and list processing.

### Pascal

Niklaus Wirth had been on the committees that modified Algol in the
’60s. His version of Pascal and the implementation process appeared in
1973. By 1979, there existed excellent compilers for Pascal. Its
popularity for both teaching and other applications is based primarily
on its simplicity and ease of use.

### Decision Time

If you had a vote in 1978-1979, how would you vote? Algol, PL/I, or
Pascal? Remember, we had IBM equipment and PL/I was big and powerful.

Algol lost, as it was not popular enough in the U. S. and because of its i/o
statements, in spite of Bob Dourson’s gallant effort on its behalf. PL/I
lost because it was an IBM product with CDC equipment on the horizon for
the whole State University System and because it was just too large. So
the decision was Pascal. Simplicity and ease of use ruled.

Oh Pascal!! Csc 118 became the introductory course into the Csc
curriculum and N. Wirth’s Pascal book became the first textbook for the
course.

Looking back 32 years later, I think we made a great decision. Time
sharing and microprocessors were now available at Cal Poly, as well as
card image input via a terminal to a central computer. But Pascal then
and even now, is simple enough for novices to learn quickly without
getting too involved in the details. Compilers were available on all
platforms. It worked great for time sharing and we had almost instant
turn around time. Big step forward!

We later moved to a close relative of Pascal, namely Modula-2, and then
in 1990 we stayed within the family with ADA. I need to mention that
over this period, a class in Unix and C programming remained in high
demand by students as a free elective. In 1995, the core sequence used
C++ as the main language with object oriented programming as a standard
feature of the curriculum. Then in 1999, Java became the main language.
C, the \`\`high level assembly language\`\` together with “GNU” inline
assembly became the main vehicles for systems and some network
programming.

What do you think, are we progressing? What is next on the language
horizon?

SOSAM Teaching and Research Award
---------------------------------

Dean William Langworthy awarded Elmo A. Keller with the 1982 School of
Science and Mathematics teaching and research award together with a
check of $250.00. Keller has recently developed a statistical
spreadsheet package, MSP, that runs on multiple platforms, Unix, MSDOS,
and Apple computers. Versions were written in both Pascal and C. The
spreadsheet has a windowing environment with both a command and a menu
driven interface and provides over 120 statistical procedures to process
data stored in a worksheet. Keller, who developed the package with
Patrick Marsh, a graduate student in the Computer Science and Statistics
Department, teaches in the areas of microprocessors, operating systems,
and statistical computation.[^13]

![image](keller3.png)

Elmo A. Keller received the 1982 School of Science and Mathematics
Teaching and Research Award.

![image](dana-mc.png)

Left to right: Charles Dana, (1982) programming languages and core
sequence; Zane Motteler (1982) compilers, microprocessors, Director CPE
program; Cornel Pokorny (1983) graphics and core sequence.
